[Docs] Add graph API handler (#9390)
mlrun/mlrun: docs/serving/api-handler.md

(api-handler)=
# API handler

API handlers perform preprocessing on serving graphs invoked by HTTP triggers to add, for example, runtime configuration and administration handlers that perform modifications on the graphs.
API handlers: 
- Support industry-defined API schemas, such as OpenAI interface for LLMs served by the graph
- Implement admin APIs for the serving graph, without having to re-deploy them, such as:

>   - Enabling and disabling model monitoring on the graph

Reviewer: Should have been deleted - https://github.com/mlrun/mlrun/pull/9390#discussion_r2878829900

API handlers support Nuclio functions whose trigger is a HTTP trigger, and the mock server.

## Overview

> When the `GraphServer receives` an event with an API handler, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `GraphServer` receives an event with an API handler, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:
```

(api-handler)=
# API handler

API handlers perform preprocessing on serving graphs invoked by HTTP triggers to add, for example, runtime configuration and administration handlers that perform modifications on the graphs.
API handlers: 
- Support industry-defined API schemas, such as OpenAI interface for LLMs served by the graph
- Implement the v2 KFServing REST API (https://kserve.github.io/website/0.8/modelserving/inference_api/)
- Implement admin APIs for the serving graph, without having to re-deploy them, such as:
  - Enabling and disabling model monitoring on the graph

>   - Adding/removing models in real-time

Reviewer: This is out of scope for the current feature.

Author: deleted

Reviewer: I still see it

Author: @jond01 I deleted **Adding/removing models in real-time**
Which other rows to delete? 7-9?

API handlers support Nuclio functions whose trigger is a HTTP trigger, and the mock server.

## Overview

> When the GraphServer receives an event with an API handler, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the `GraphServer` receives an event with an API handler, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:
```

> - Sends the event to either the root graph step, or another step named in the configuration, as shown in the diagram.

Reviewer: It currently only sends to the root, but can decide on allow/forbid for specific paths

Author: @jond01 Not clear what you intend. Pls provide the correct text.

> - Executes a method on the event. This is used for administrative operations. Once the admin operation is completed, a response is sent back to the user.

Reviewer: Not supported

Author: deleted

- Can also API handler can perform additional (optional) manipulations on the event body (data), for example, to extract relevant fields from specific paths in the JSON input, and construct the event to be sent to the graph based on the transformations defined by the user.

> If the event was sent to an invalid path, it fails the request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the event was sent to an invalid path, it fails the request with the relevant HTTP error.
```

## SDK
The `set_api_handler_config` accepts the full configuration. You cannot add/remove paths and mappings directly on the serving runtime. 

### Guidelines
Path expressions
- Paths are generally assumed to be a specific path, unless globs (*) are used. For example setting a /v1/completion/* path matches any path that starts with `/v1/completion/`, but using `/v1/completion` only meets this specific path.

> - If multiple matches exist, the one that is most specific is chosen. For example, if `/v1/completion/*` is set to `allow`, and `/v1/completion/bad` is set to `fail` - calling `/v1/completion/bad` fails the request due to its being more specific.

Reviewer: There's more to that.

- There are also paths with params, e.g. `/api/{version}/chat` - version is a path parameter
- Regarding matching priority - the 1st priority is the exact path, then path with param (`/{param}`), the star path (`/api/*`). Inside the path param and star path, the priority is by insertion order, not the most specific match. See also [ML-12216](https://iguazio.atlassian.net/browse/ML-12216).

Body mapping  

> - JSONPath may be producing multiple results. For example, in the canonical book store sample, looking for `$['store']['book'][*]['title']` results in all the titles of all the books in the store. The handler should handle this situation and place the results in the field specified as a list of values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- JSONPath may be producing multiple results. For example, in the canonical book store sample, looking for `$['store']['book'][*]['title']` results in all the titles of all the books in the store. The handler places the results in the field specified as a list of values.
```

Author: updated

> - If the JSONPath search returns a complex object, for example looking for `$['store']['book'][0]` which returns the entire dictionary of the first book (not just the title as above), the results should be placed as-is into the field selected, such that the full result dict is in the field (or a list of these dict results, given previous point).

Reviewer: Again - why should?

Author: @jond01 pls be specific and supply correct text

- To support that, the API handler parses the URL and splits it to its components, placing it in a field called `mlrun_url_path_segments` (the `mlrun_` denotes a system-provided field). For example, in the URL for chat completion, the parts are [“v1”,”chat”,”completions”,<completion id>]. This allows the graph steps to use this information to extract any information needed.
- In addition, any query params are also placed in an event field called `mlrun_url_query_params`. This is a dictionary mapping from param name to its value(s). For example, the OpenAI get-chat-messages call supports a limit param (among others), so a call to - `GET .../v1/chat/completions/{completion_id}/messages?limit=10` sets the value of this field to {“limit”: 10}. Of course, this field is optional, and its value could be empty if no query params are used.

> - This behavior is controlled by the `include_url_info` configuration, which, when set to `False`, bypasses the entire URL parsing logic (URL parts and query params).

Reviewer: I think it's taken from the Confluence, I think it's not useful to put here as-is.
In addition, the URL path params are passed as parameters, not a list of path parts.

Author: @jond01 Is any of this relevant for the doc?

Reviewer 2: I think this information is important, as it explains a functionality that the user should be aware of. @jond01 - please provide a corrected text for the URL path params.

Once configured, the API handler configuration is placed in the serving function’s serving spec, so it can be picked up at deployment time and the handler can be instantiated based on it. 

## Viewing API handlers in graphs
In a serving graph visualized in the MLRun UI, the graph displays details on the API handler. For example, you can see allowed paths, and also the transformations between schemas. 

> In a Jupyter plot of a graph there are indications that an API handler exists without specific details.

Reviewer: Good point, I think that's a missing part in the implementation for this version 🤔

Author: @jond01 Do you mean to delete row 50? Or both 49 and 50?

Reviewer: Remove 49
Keep 50 - but it's an implementation gap

Author: @jond01 If it'snot implemented it should not be in the doc. Pls clarify

Reviewer 3: @jond01 I see this is pending your answer. Jill is right, if something is missing then we shouldn't document it, or did you mean something different here?

## Usage

> ## Examples

Reviewer: Yes - examples are welcome :)
You may refer to the notebook I attached to [ML-12061](https://iguazio.atlassian.net/browse/ML-12061).

(api-handler)=
# API handler

API handlers perform preprocessing on serving graphs invoked by HTTP triggers to add, for example, runtime configuration and administration handlers that perform modifications on the graphs.
API handlers: 
- Support industry-defined API schemas, such as OpenAI interface for LLMs served by the graph
- Implement admin APIs for the serving graph, without having to re-deploy them, such as:

>   - Enabling and disabling model monitoring on the graph

Reviewer 2: I would refactor these sentences to focus on what we support today. Something like:

API handlers perform preprocessing on serving graphs invoked by HTTP triggers to add support for API schemas, allowing for transformations and validations on the incoming event to prepare it for the graph consumption.
This enables processing incoming events using industry-defined API schemas, such as OpenAI interface, and extracting only the relevant content from the incoming event that is needed for the graph processing.
With an API handler, the incoming HTTP event content is not sent as-is to the processing graph, but first undergoes the following optional transformations:
- Verify that the incoming event URL is supported.
- Extract specific fields from the payload and populate event fields with their values.
- Insert information extracted from the URL into the event fields, for example copy a query-param value into a field.

<< I would show a simple example here, of an incoming OAI API asking for completions and how it is translated to event fields. For example, getting just the incoming input while ignoring configurations such as the model type, max completion tokens and parallel tool calls>>

```
POST https://{function URL}/v1/responses
{
    "model": "gpt-5.4",
    "max_completion_tokens": 1000,
    "parallel_tool_calls": true,
    "temperature": 0,
    "input": "Tell me a three sentence bedtime story about a unicorn.",
}
```
can be converted to an event looking like this sent to the graph, which removes the OAI-specific formatting of the incoming event ->
```
{
    "input": "Tell me a three sentence bedtime story about a unicorn."
}
```

@jond01 - feel free to format this so it's correct...

> API handlers support Nuclio functions whose trigger is a HTTP trigger, and the mock server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
API handlers support serving functions whose trigger is a HTTP trigger, and the mock server.
```

Does not apply for generic nuclio functions.

## Overview

> When the `GraphServer` receives an event with an API handler, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the `GraphServer` with an API handler receives an event, and prior to actually sending it to the graph, it evalauates whether the event was sent to a user-configured allowed paths. If yes, it:
```

To clarify that the server has the API handler, not the event.

> - Sends the event to either the root graph step, or another step named in the configuration.

Reviewer 2: Remove. This is not supported yet.

> - Can also API handler can perform additional (optional) manipulations on the event body (data), for example, to extract relevant fields from specific paths in the JSON input, and construct the event to be sent to the graph based on the transformations defined by the user.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Perform additional (optional) manipulations on the event body (data), for example, to extract relevant fields from specific paths in the JSON input, and construct the event to be sent to the graph based on the transformations defined by the user.
```

If the event was sent to an invalid path, it fails the request with the relevant HTTP error.

## SDK
The {py:meth}`~mlrun.runtimes.ServingRuntime.set_api_handler_config` accepts the full configuration. You cannot add or remove paths and mappings directly on the serving runtime. 

## Guidelines

> **Path expressions**

Reviewer 2: I'm missing here first an overview of what configurations are supported in general, before diving into the actual details of each configuration.

> - Paths are generally assumed to be a specific path, unless globs (*) are used. For example setting a /v1/completion/* path matches any path that starts with `/v1/completion/`, but using `/v1/completion` only meets this specific path.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Paths are generally assumed to be a specific path, unless globs (*) are used. For example setting a `/v1/completion/*` path matches any path that starts with `/v1/completion/`, but using `/v1/completion` only meets this specific path.
```

- Paths can include params, for example, `/api/{version}/chat`, where version is a path parameter.
- If multiple matches exist, the priority is 
  1. Specific paths, for example `/api/v1/allowed` 
  2. Paths with params, for example `/api/{version}}/allowed` 

>   3. Paths with stars, for example `/api/*` 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. Paths with globs, for example `/api/*` 
```

>   Inside the paths with param or star, the priority is by insertion order, not the most specific match.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Inside the paths with param or glob, the priority is by insertion order, not the most specific match.
```

**Body mapping**
- JSONPath may be producing multiple results. For example, in the canonical book store sample, looking for `$['store']['book'][*]['title']` results in all the titles of all the books in the store. The handler places the results in the field specified as a list of values.

> - If the JSONPath search returns a complex object, for example looking for `$['store']['book'][0]` which returns the entire dictionary of the first book (not just the title as above), the results should be placed as-is into the field selected, such that the full result dict is in the field (or a list of these dict results, given previous point).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If the JSONPath search returns a complex object, for example looking for `$['store']['book'][0]` which returns the entire dictionary of the first book (not just the title as above), the results are placed as-is into the field selected, such that the full result dict is in the field (or a list of these dict results, given previous point).
```

In a Jupyter plot of a graph there are indications that an API handler exists without specific details.

## Examples

```python
project = mlrun.get_or_create_project("serving-fn", context="./serving-fn")

# mlrun: start-code
# Define a function to handle inputs
def print_input_handler(event):
    print(f"Received input: {event}")
    print(f"Input type: {type(event)}")
    return event
# mlrun: end-code

# Demonstrate automatic API handler injection
from mlrun.common.schemas.serving import APIHandlerAction
from mlrun.runtimes.nuclio.serving import APIHandlerConfig
from http import HTTPMethod

# Create a new serving function with API handler config
serving_fn_auto = project.set_function(
    name="serving-with-api-handler",
    kind="serving",
    image="mlrun:mlrun",
)

# Set up API handler configuration
api_config = APIHandlerConfig()
api_config.add_endpoint_handler(
    "/health", HTTPMethod.GET, APIHandlerAction.ALLOW, "Health check endpoint"
)
api_config.add_endpoint_handler(
    "/predict", HTTPMethod.POST, APIHandlerAction.ALLOW, "Prediction endpoint"
)

> 

Reviewer 2: Add also an example of using the `add_body_mapping` configuration.

serving_fn_auto.to_dict()

> serving_fn_auto.spec.api_handler_config

Reviewer 2: Let's remove this - it is confusing and not clear why I need this.

serving_fn_auto.save()

serving_fn_auto.deploy()

serving_fn_auto.invoke("/health", method="GET")

serving_fn_auto.invoke("/admin", method="GET", body="test")

> 

Reviewer 2: After adding an example for body-mapping, show an `invoke` with a body, and provide a comment explaining what will be sent to the graph.

> serving_fn_auto.spec.api_handler_config

Reviewer 2: Again, that is not needed in the example. It can be shown with a comment explaining why we put it here (just for illustration purposes).
